Add guides on how to use relationship fields (#5511)
keystonejs/keystone: docs-next/pages/guides/configuring-relationships.mdx

# Configuring relationships

Keystone allows you to model your data by declaring [relationships](/docs/discussions/relationships.md) between lists.
This guide will step you through the **decision making process** to follow when modelling your data with relationships.
If you haven't already, make sure you've read the [Understanding Relationships](./understanding-relationships) guide, which introduces the core concepts discussed here.

Throughout this guide we will use the example of a blog application which has `Users` and `Posts`.

## One-sided vs two-sided

A relationship in Keystone exists _between_ two lists.
In our blog, the concept of _authorship_ (who wrote a post) can be represented as a relationship between the `User` and the `Post` lists.

The first question you need to consider is which list do you want to be able to access the relationship from in your GraphQL API?
In our blog we might want to be able to ask about a `user's posts`, a `post's author`, or possibly both.
If you only need to access one side of the relationship then you want to configure a _one-sided_ relationship. If you need both, then you want to configure a _two-sided_ relationship.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, in either case, the data stored is the same.
This distinction solely effects how the relationship is surfaces by the GraphQL API.

```

(This is correct, right?)

Query {
  allUsers {
    name
    posts {
      title
      content
    }
  }
}
```

## Cardinality

The second question we need to ask is what the _cardinality_ of our relationship should be.
The _cardinality_ of a relationship is the number items which can exist on either side of the relationship.
In our blog do we want each post to have exactly one author, or can it have multiple authors?
Are users allowed to write more than one post or do we want to restrict them to exactly one post each for some reason?
The answers to these questions will give us the cardinality of our relationship.

There are three types of cardinality, `one-to-many`, `many-to-many`, and `one-to-one`, and they can be configured using the `many` config option.

### One-to-many

If we want a blog where each post can have **one** author, and each user can be the author of **many** posts, then we have a `one-to-many` relationship.
We can configure a one-sided version of this:

```typescript
import { config, createSchema, list } from '@keystone-next/keystone/schema';
import { text, relationship } from '@keystone-next/fields';

export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    User: list({
      fields: {

>         name: text()

Reviewer 2: This one doesn't have a trailing comma while the other bits do... not a blocker... just pointing out.

      }
    }),
    Post: list({
      fields: {
        title: text(),
        content: text(),

>         author: relationship({ ref: 'User', many: false }),

Reviewer 2: This one has a trailing comma and the other bits don't ... not a blocker... just pointing out

Author: Ah yeah, I need to go and manually lint this 👍

      fields: {
        name: text(),
        posts: relationship({ ref: 'Post.authors', many: true }),
      }
    }),
    Post: list({
      fields: {
        title: text(),
        content: text(),
        authors: relationship({ ref: 'User.posts', many: true }),
      }
    })
  }),
});
```

Note that we have used `many: true` in both the `authors` and `posts` fields.

### One-to-one

If we want a blog where each post has exactly **one** author, and each user is restricted to writing exactly **one** post, then we have a `one-to-one` relationship.
In this case we can only specify this with a two-sided relationship:

```typescript
export default config({
  lists: createSchema({
    User: list({
      fields: {
        name: text(),
        post: relationship({ ref: 'Post.author', many: false }),
      }
    }),
    Post: list({
      fields: {
        title: text(),
        content: text(),
        author: relationship({ ref: 'User.post', many: false }),
      }
    })
  }),
});
```

Note that we have used `many: false` in both the `authors` and `posts` fields.

## Summary

When configuring a relationship in Keystone there are two key questions you need to answer:

> - Do I want a one-sided or two-sided relationship?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Do I want to access the relationship from only one-side or both?
```

Or something similar; just feel we should be emphasising this is purely around access/API.

Author: This language is specifically goal oriented, not technically oriented, around what they want to be able to do, which will lead them to the technical decision of one-sided or two-sided.

Author: Oh wait, I'm reading this backwards, and it's my prose that's very wrong. yes, good suggestion indeed!
